I am a climate scientist and I hate
weather I have spent too much time in
California and I strongly feel that
weather should be optional so I don't
want to experience clouds let alone
study them but clouds seem to follow me
wherever I go
this thing is clouds are a real
challenge for climate science we don't
know how they're going to react as the
planet heats up and hidden in that
uncertainty might be hope maybe just
maybe clouds could slow down global
warming and buy us a little bit more
time to get our act together which would
be very convenient right now I mean even
I could put up with a few more cloudy
days if clouds save the planet now we
are sure about some things carbon
dioxide is a greenhouse gas we're
emitting a lot of it and the planets
heating up case closed
but I still go to work every day it
turns out that there is a lot that we
don't understand about climate change in
particular we haven't answered what
seems to be a very fundamental question
we know it's going to get hot but we
don't know exactly how hot it's going to
get now this is a really easy question
to answer if one of you would like to
give me a time machine but I'm going to
be honest with you if I had a time
machine I would not be hanging out at
this particular point in history so in
order to see the future we have to rely
on the output of computer simulations
climate models like this one now in my
line of work I encounter many very
charming people on the internet who like
to tell me that climate models are all
wrong and I would just like to say no
kidding
seriously I get paid to complain about
climate models but we don't want models
to be perfect we want them to be useful
I mean think about it
a computer simulation that's able to
exactly reproduce all of reality that's
not a climate model that's the matrix so
models are not crystal balls they're
research tools and the ways in which
they're wrong can actually teach us a
lot for example different climate models
are largely able to capture the warming
that we've seen so far but fast forward
to the end of the century under a
business-as-usual scenario and climate
models don't really agree anymore yeah
they're all warming that's just basic
physics but some of them project
catastrophe more than five times the
warming we've seen already and others
are literally more chill so why don't
climate models agree on how warm it's
going to get well to a large extent it's
because they don't agree on what clouds
will do in the future and that is
because just like me
computers hate clouds computers hate
clouds because they're simultaneously
very large and very small clouds are
formed when microscopic water droplets
or ice crystals coalesce around tiny
particles but at the same time they
cover two-thirds of the Earth's surface
in order to really accurately model
clouds we need to track the behavior of
every water droplet and dust grain and
the entire atmosphere and there's no
computer powerful enough to do that so
instead we have to make a trade-off we
can zoom in and get the details right
but have no idea what's going on
worldwide
or we could sacrifice realism at small
scales in order to see the bigger
picture now there's no one right answer
no perfect way to do this
and different climate models make
different choices now it is unfortunate
that computers struggle with clouds
because clouds are crucially important
in regulating the temperature of the
planet in fact if all the clouds went
away we would experience profound
climate changes but without clouds would
it be warmer or colder the answer is
both so I'm going to be honest with you
I am NOT a cloud spotter my favorite
type of cloud is none but even I know
that clouds come in all shapes and sizes
low thick clouds like these are really
good at blocking out the Sun and ruining
your BBQ and high wispy clouds like the
Cirrus largely let that sunlight stream
through every sunny day is the same but
every cloudy day is cloudy in its own
way and it's this diversity that can
make the global impact of clouds very
hard to understand so to see this global
affective clouds it really helps to take
a selfie it will never cease to blow my
mind that we can see our planet from
outer space but we can't see all of it
clouds are blocking the view and that's
what they do these low thick clouds are
extremely effective sun shades they turn
back about 20% of everything the Sun
sends us that is a lot of wasted solar
power so low clouds are powerful sun
shades making the planet core but that's
not the only effective clouds our planet
has a temperature and like anything with
the temperature it's giving off heat we
are radiating thermal energy away into
space and we can see this in the
infrared and once again clouds are
blocking the view
that's because high clouds live in the
upper reaches of the atmosphere where
it's very cold and this means that they
lose very little heat to space
themselves but at the same time they
block the heat coming up from the planet
below the earth is trying to cool itself
off and high clouds
of getting in the way the result is a
very powerful greenhouse effect so house
played this very large and dual role in
the climate system we've got low clouds
that act like the sun shades cooling the
planet and high clouds which act like a
greenhouse warming the planet NOW right
now these two effects they don't cancel
out that sun shades it's a little bit
more powerful so if we got rid of all
the clouds tomorrow which for the record
I am NOT advocating our planet would get
warmer so clearly all of the clouds are
not going away but climate change is
changed so we can ask how will global
warming change clouds remember clouds
are so important in regulating the
earth's temperature and they both warm
and cool the planet so even small
changes the cloud cover could have
profound consequences so we might also
ask how will clouds change global
warming and that is where there might be
space for hope if global warming
triggers cloud changes that make for a
less powerful greenhouse or a more
effective sunshade then that would
enhance the cooling power of clouds it
would act in opposition to global
warming and that's what's happening in
those climate models that project
relatively muted warming but climate
models struggle with clouds and this
uncertainty it goes both ways
clouds could help us out with global
warming it could also make it worse now
we know that climate change is happening
because we can see it rising
temperatures melting IceCaps shifts and
rainfall patterns and you might think
that we could also see it in the clouds
here's something else unfortunate clouds
are really hard to see I see everybody
from the Pacific Northwest is like I
have some suggestions for you and you
guys we have tried
looking up but in order to do climate
science we need to see all of the clouds
everywhere for a very long time and
that's what makes it hard now nothing
sees more clouds than a satellite not
even a British person and fortunately we
do have satellite observations of clouds
that like me date back to the 1980s but
these satellites were designed for
weather not climate they weren't in it
for the long haul so to get that long
term trend information we need to do
climate science we have to stitch
together the output of multiple
satellites with different viewing angles
and orbits and carrying different camera
equipment and as a result there are gaps
in our knowledge but even from this very
cloudy picture we're starting to get
hints of a possible future when we look
at the observations one thing jumped out
at us the clouds are moving as the
planets temperature increases high
clouds rise up they move to the colder
upper reaches of the atmosphere and this
means that even as the planet heats up
high clouds don't they remain at roughly
the same temperature so they are not
using more heat to space but at the same
time they're trapping more heat from the
warming planet below this intensifies
the greenhouse effect high clouds are
making global warming worse how they're
moving in other dimensions to the
atmospheric circulation that large-scale
motion of air and water in the
atmosphere is changing and how they're
going with it on large scales clouds
seem to be moving from the tropics
toward the poles it's kind of like your
grandparents in Reverse and this matters
because if your job is to block incoming
sunlight you are going to be much more
effective in the tropics under that
intense tropical Sun then you are in
higher latitudes so if this keeps up
this will also make global warming worse
and what we have not found despite years
of looking is any indication of the
opposite there is no observational
evidence that clouds will substantially
slow down global warming the earth is
not going to break its own fever now
there is still uncertainties here we
don't know for sure what the future
holds but we are sending our kids there
and they are never coming back I want
them to be prepared for what they'll
face and that is why it is so important
to keep our Earth observing satellites
up there and to hire diverse and smart
and talented people who do not hate
clouds to improve the climate models but
uncertainty is not ignorant we don't
know everything but we don't know
nothing
and we know what carbon dioxide does I
started my career as an astrophysicist
so you can believe me when I say that
this is the greatest place in the
universe other planets might have liquid
water on earth we have whiskey
we are so lucky to live here but let's
not push our luck I don't think that
clouds will save the planet
I think that's probably up to us thank
you
[Applause]